--- 
layout: post
title: Quine
categories: [Philosophy]
---

Last week I started reading a new book called *Quine in Dialogue*. It's 
a mix of interviews, articles and letters involving the work of Quine
and also other philosophers/mathematicians like Russell, Carnap, etc.

It's been a while since I last read something related to philosophy of
mathematics. I was very interested in that when I was at the university.
One of the papers I read was *On formally undecidable
propositions of Principia Mathematica and related systems* by Kurt
Gödel.

*Gödel's Theorem* says that in any (consistent) axiomatic system 
there's a proposition that can't be inferred by the axioms 
and inference rules defined within the system. 
Neither the proposition nor its negation can be inferred
actually. 

I find the demonstration of this theorem very interesting, since
in order to prove this Gödel needs to define a meta-system in which to 
make a proof about formal systems. He maps symbols of logic to natural numbers 
and creates a system where all propositions in logic are mapped to a
natural number. Then he constructs this *Gödel number*, a number that
cannot be produced from the set of rules mapped from this consistent
axiomatic system.

As I understand it, Gödel's Theorem attacked formalists and
logic-positivists.

Quine though, seems to be have an optimistic view about this:

*In fact, you know, Gödel's proof shows us a byproduct - maybe I should
go back a step: Gödel's proof applies to any formalism, formalism being
sharply defined, but what the definition comes to is that rules of proof
are formal if they could be programmed on a computer. And a proof
procedure is formal if it can be tested on a computer to see whether it
was carried through correctly or not. So, this is very liberal, and
anything that could be thought of really as a  proof beyond pure
adventure surely should be formal.*

*The point is that Gödel's proof is always carried out relative to some
given formalism; he doesn't give the formalism, but given any formalism
that fulfills these requirements for a formalism, relative to that you
can construct this sentence, which cannot be proved by that formalism,
unless the formalism is such that you could prove a falsity. In fact, if
you could prove it, it would be false. What I wanted to bring out here
is that it also comes out of Gödel's proof that this formula, this
undecidable formula, is in fact true. And that you can, then, adopt it
as a further axiom, strenghten your system, now there is a system, in
which that previously undecidable theorem is a theorem. But then
reconstruct Gödel's whole argument relative to this extended system, you
get another. And that's so, but - surely Gödel wouldn't have conceded
either that this shows that formalism is a dead end, and that something
else should be found; but on the contrary, this is where formalism
really in an informal way has vindicated itself, in showing the thing to
be true. (Pause) It says that you can extend your horizon, but there's
always a further step with which yout horizon could be extended, and
that's Gödel's theorem.*


