---
layout: post
title: Jean Baudrillard
permalink: baudrillard
categories: [Misc., Philosophy]
---

I had a good laugh in the train today while reading [Fashionable
Nonsense](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fashionable_Nonsense), a critique
on postmodernist intellectuals and how they abuse of science.
Here's an excerpt of a chapter about Baudrillard. The
chapter starts like this:

\-\-

"Jean Baudrillard's sociological work challenges and provokes all
current theories. With derision, but also with *extreme precision*, he
unknots the constituted social descriptions with quiet confidence and a
sense of humor."
Le Monde (1984b, p.95)

The sociologist and philosopher Jean Baudrillard is well-known for his
reflections on the problems of reality, appearance, and illusion. In
this chapter we want to draw attention to a less-noted aspect of
Baudrillard's work, namely his frequent use of scientific and
pseudo-scientific terminology.

In some cases, Baudrillard's invocation of scientific concepts is
clearly metaphorical. For example, he wrote about the Gulf War as
follows:

*What is most extraordinary is that the two hypotheses, the apocalypse
of real time and pure war along with the triumph of the virtual over the
real, are realised at the same time, in the same space-time, each in
implacable pursuit of the other. It is a sign that the space of the
event has become a hyperspace with multiple refractivity, and that the
space of war has become definitely non-Euclidean.* (Baudrillard 1995, p.
50).

There seems to be a tradition of using technical mathematical notions
out of context. With Lacan, it was tori and imaginary numbers; with
Kristeva, infinite sets; and here we have non-Euclidean spaces. But what
could this metaphor mean? Indeed, what would a *Euclidean* space of war
look like? Let us note in passing that the concept of "hyperspace with
multiple refractivity" \[*hyperespace à réfraction multiple*\] does not
exist in either mathematics nor physics; it is a Baudrillardian
invention.

\-\-

Here's another excerpt I took. It starts with a quote on Baudrillard's
work:

\-\-

*Our complex, metastatic, viral systems, condemned to the exponential
dimension alone (be it that of exponential stability or instability), to
eccentricity and indefinite fractal scissiparity, can no longer come to
an end. Condemned to an intense metabolism, to an intense internal
metastasis, they become exhausted within themselves and no longer have
any destination, any end, any otherness, any fatality. They are
condemned, precisely, to the epidemic, to the endless excrescences of
the fractal and not to the reversibility and perfect resolution of the
fateful. We know only the signs of catastrophe now; we no longer know
the signs of destiny. (And besides, has any concern been shown in Chaos
Theory for the equally extraordinary, contrary phenomenon of
hyposensitivity to initial conditions, of the inverse exponentiality of
effects in relation to causes - the potential hurricanes which end in
the beating of a butterfly's wings?)* (Baudrillard 1994, pp. 111-114).


The last paragraph is Baudrillardian *par excellence*. One would be hard
pressed not to notice the high density of scientific and
pseudo-scientific terminology - inserted in sentences that are, as far
as we can make out, devoid of meaning.

These texts are, however, atypical of Baudrillard's oeuvre, because they
allude (albeit in a confused fashion) to more-or-less well-defined
scientific ideas. More often one comes across sentences like these:

*There is no better model of the way in which the computer screen and
the mental screen of our brain are interwoven than Moebius's topology,
with its peculiar contiguity of near and far, inside and outside, object
and subject within the same spiral. It is in accordance with this same
model that information and communication are constantly turning round
upon themselves in an incestuous circumvolution, a superficial
conflation of subject and object, within and without, question and
answer, event and image, and so on. The form is inevitably that of a
twisted ring reminiscent of the mathematical symbol for infinity.*
(Baudrillard 1993, p. 56).

As Gross and Levitt remark, "this is as pompous as it is meaningless."

\-\-

Taken from *Fashionable Nonsense* by Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont.



