---
layout: post
title: A "Nondissertable" Subject
permalink: dimension
categories: [Math, Philosophy]
---

We already said that Cantor's definition had one fault - it was not at
all suitable for curves in space. But then what is a surface in space?
No one knew. This problem - to determine what curves and surfaces in
space are - was put in the summer of 1921 to his twentythree year old
student Pavel Samuelovich Urysohn by the venerable Professor Dimitri
Fedorovich Yegorov of Moscow University (it is evident that he thought a
lot about the mathematical significance of the problem or, as is
sometimes said today, of the "dissertability" of the subject - this
problem was one of the hardest!)

Urysohn quickly comprehended that Yegorov's problem was only a special
case of a much more general problem: what is the dimension of a
geometric figure, i.e., what are the characteristics of the figure which
cause us to say that a segment or circumference has dimension 1, a
square has dimension 2, and a cube or sphere has dimension 3? Here is
what is remembered about this period in the life of P. S. Urysohn by his
closest friend, a young doctoral candidate in those days and now an
academician, the honorary president of the Moscow Mathematical Society,
Pavel Sergeevich Aleksandrov: "... the whole summer of 1921 was spent in
trying to find an 'up-to-date' definition (of dimension); P. S. shifted
his interest from one variant to another, constantly setting up examples
showing why this or that variant had to be eliminated. He spent two
months totally absorbed in his meditations. At last, one morning near
the end of August, P. S. awoke with his now well-known inductive
definition of dimension in its final form... That very morning, while we
were bathing in the Klyaz'ma, P. S. Urysohn told me about his definition
of dimension and there, during the conversation that extended over
several hours, outlined a plan for a complete theory of dimension
composed of a series of theorems, which were then hypotheses that he did
not yet know how to go about proving and which were later proved one
after another in the months that followed. I never again either
participated in or witnessed a mathematical conversation composed of
such a dense flow of new ideas as the conversation of that August
morning.

(...)

## The Inductive Definition of Dimension

Let us now discuss more precisely how Urysohn defined the dimension of a
geometric figure. A typical zero-dimensional set would be a set
consisting of a single point or, in the worst case, of a finite number
of points. But in such a set each point has a relative neighborhood with
empty boundary - the point itself. This was the property that Urysohn
took for his definition of a set of dimension zero

*A set F has dimension zero, if each of its points has an arbitrarily
small relative neighborhood with empty boundary.*

In most cases it is possible to establish that a set has dimension zero
by selecting for each point an arbitrarily small ordinary neighborhood
whose boundary contains no point of the set F (then the boundary of the
relative neighborhood is sure to be empty). But there are
zero-dimensional sets situated in three-dimensional space for whose
points such ordinary neighborhoods are not available.

The words "arbitrarily small" are inserted in the definition for the
following reason. If these were not there, then we could, for instance,
find a circle big enough to hold an entire square within it and so that
no point of the square would be on the boundary of the circle. So if
these words were not in the definition, we would find that the dimension
of a square is zero, not two as it really is.

In addition to finite sets, many infinite sets have dimension zero, For
example, take the set of points of the \\(x\\) axis with coordinates
\\(0, 1, \\frac{1}{2}, \\frac{1}{3}, ..., \\frac{1}{n}, ...\\). It is
clear that any point of this set has an arbitrarily small neighborhood
that does not contain any points of this set. Only the case of the point
\\(0\\) might cause some doubts. But if we take a neighborhood of radius
\\(\\alpha\\), where \\(\\alpha\\) is an irrational number, then no
point of the set will occur on the boundary of this neighborhood.

A set F has *dimension one*, if it is not zero-dimensional and each of
its points has an arbitrarily small neighborhood whose boundary
intersects the set F in a zero-dimensional set.

It turned out that not only all the ordinary curves (circle, line
segment, ellipse, etc) but also all Cantor curves have dimension *one*
in Urysohn's sense. Thus, it now became possible to define the notion of
a curve in space as well as in the plane.

*A curve is a continuum of dimension one.*

*Taken from Stories about Sets by N.Ya.Vilenkin*

