---
layout: post
title: Stargazing
permalink: stargazing
categories: [History, Math]
---

*There is a lesson to be learned from revieweing the major steps leading
to this intellectual upheaval. The study of the heavens provided the
first great scientific synthesis in the form of the astronomical theory
of Eudoxus. This was followed by the quantitative, practically useful,
and highly influential system of Hipparchus and Ptolemy. Further study
of the heavens produced the revolutionary astronomy of Copernicus and
Kepler. On the basis of a heliocentric theory the universal law of
gravitation became a tenable hypothesis. The validity of the law was
further attested to by the deduction from it of Kepler's laws. Finally,
the astronomical work of Lagrange and Laplace removed all doubts about
the reign of universal mathematical laws in nature. The lesson to be
gathered from this history is that the curious stargazer can tell us
more about our world than the practical 'man of affairs'. Our best
knowledge of the behavior of even those natural phenomena pervading our
immediate environment has come from the contemplation of the heavens and
not from the pursuit of practical problems. The sense of law that
predisposes men to attribute all phenomena, even completely inexplicable
ones, to regular rather than to abnormal behavior of nature, this habit
of substituting law for supernatural intervention, was developed by
looking away from man's immediate problems and by studying the motion of
the most distant stars.*

Taken from *Mathematics in Western Culture* by Morris Kline.


