---
layout: post
title: Spinoza vs. Leibniz on God
permalink: spinoza-leibniz-god
categories: [Philosophy]
---

*At this point, the contrast with Spinoza's concept of God could hardly
be starker - and that is precisely the point behind the vision. The
difference goes back to that simple-sounding question: Does God have a
choice? Spinoza says no; Leibniz says yes. Spinoza says that God has
only one world to choose from, namely, the one that follows ineluctably
from its own Nature. Leibniz counters that God always has the option not
to create the world; and, when God decides to go ahead with the project,
he faces a choice among an infinite number of possible worlds. Spinoza's
God has no need for anthropomorphic encumbrances such as a will or
intellect, for it has no choices to contemplate and no resolutions to
affirm. Leibniz's God, on the other hand, looks much more like you or
me: he must have a capacity for thought and action in order to make his
choices. Finally, whereas Spinoza's Substance is well beyond the merely
human categories of good and evil, Leibniz's God is the ultimate
do-gooder, as he shuffles through all possible worlds hoping to locate
"the best".*

*In sum, Spinoza believes in an "immanent" God; Leibniz argues for a
"transcendent" one. Spinoza's God is the immanent cause of things: it
creates the world in the same way that an essence creates its properties
-that is, in the same way that the nature of a circle makes it round. It
is in the world (just as the world is in it) and therefore cannot
conceivably be associated with any other world or with no world at all.
A transcendent God, in the other hand, is the "transitive" cause of
things. He creates the world in the same way that a watchmaker makes a
watch. He stands outside the world, and he would still be God whether he
opted to create this world, another world, or no world at all. He has a
certain degree of personhood (which is why we tend to call him "he", in
deference to the tradition). Leibniz sometimes uses the phrase
"supra-mundane intelligence" to describe his transcendent God. Dropping
the polysyllabes we could also say simply that Spinoza's divinity is
one that inhabits the "here and now", while Leibniz's resides in the
"before and beyond".*

*The confrontation between Leibnizian and Spinozistic conceptions of
divinity, incidentally, continues to characterize discussions to the
present, notably in the field of cosmology (never mind the relatively
changeless field of theology). Among contemporary physicists, for
example, there are those who maintain that the laws of nature are
inherently arbitrary. According to their rather Leibnizian view, God (or
perhaps a Great Designer) selects from among an infinite range of
parameters for the laws of nature, and everything else in the world then
unfolds within the chosen regime. Others physicists, however, maintain
that the parameters that define the laws themselves, such that nature
may account for itself in an utterly self-sufficient way. Such theorists
may be said to lean to the side of Spinoza.*

Taken from *The Courtier and the Heretic* by *Matthew Stewart*.
