---
layout: post
title: Our Senses
permalink: our-senses
categories: [History, Math]
---

*First, Copernican theory has done more to determine the content of
modern science than is generally recognized. The most powerful and most
useful single law of science is Newton's law of gravitation. Whithout
anticipating here the discussion reserved for a more appropriate place
in this book we can say that the best experimental evidence for this
law, the evidence which established it, depends entirely on the
heliocentric theory.*

*Second, this theory is reponsible for a new trend in science and human
thought, barely preceptible at the time but all-important today. Since
our eyes do not see, not our bodies feel, the rotation and revolution of
the Earth, the new theory rejected the evidence of the senses. Things
were not what they seemed to be. Sense data could be misleading and
reason was the reliable guide. Copernicus and Kepler thereby set the
precedent that guides modern science, namely, that reason and
mathematics are more important in understanding and interpreting the
universe than the evidence of the senses. Vast portions of electrical and
atomic theory and the whole theory of relativity would never have been
conceived if scientists had not come to accept the reliance upon reason
first exemplified by Copernican theory. In this very significant sense
Copernicus and Kepler began the Age of Reason, in addition to fulfilling
the cardinal function of scientists and mathematicians, that is, to
provide a rational comprehension of the universe.*

Taken from *Mathematics in Western Culture* by Morris Kline.

