---
layout: post
title: "Confess"
permalink: confess
categories: [Reading]
---

*His eyes were dimmed with tears and, looking humbly up to heaven,
he wept for the innocence he had lost.*

*When evening had fallen he left the house and the first touch of the
damp dark air and the noise of the door as it closed behind him made
ache again his conscience, lulled by prayer and tears. Confess! Confess!
It was not enough to lull the conscience with a tear and a prayer. He
had to kneel before the minister of the Holy Ghost and tell over his
hidden sins truly and repentantly. Before he heard again the footboard
of the housedoor trail over the threshold as it opened to let him in,
before he saw again the table in the kitchen set for supper he would
have knelt and confessed. It was quite simple.*

*The ache of conscience ceased and he walked onward swiftly through the
dark streets. There were so many flagstones on the footpath of that
street and so many streets in that city and so many cities in the world.
Yet eternity had no end. He was in mortal sin. Even once was a mortal
sin. It could happen in an instant. But how so quickly? By seeing or by
thinking of seeing. The eyes see the thing, without having wished first
to see. Then in an instant it happens. But does that part of the body
understand or what? The serpent, the most subtle beast of the field. It
must understand when it desires in one instant and then prolongs its own
desire instant after instant, sinfully. It feels and understands and
desires. What a horrible thing! Who made it to be like that, a bestial
part of the body able to understand bestially and desire bestially? Was
that then he or an inhuman thing moved by a lower soul than his soul?
His soul sickened at the thought of a torpid snaky life feeding itself
out of the tender marrow of his life and fattening upon the slime of
lust. O why was that so? O why?*

Taken from "A portrait of the artist as a young man" by James Joyce






