---
layout: post
title: "Kiss 2"
permalink: kiss-2
categories: [Reading]
---

*He walked onward, undismayed, wondering whether he had strayed into the
quarter of the jews. Women and girls dressed in long vivid gowns
traversed the street from house to house. They were leisurely and
perfumed. A trembling seized him and his eyes grew dim. The yellow
gasflames arose before his troubled vision against the vapoury sky,
burning as if before an altar. Before the doors and in the lighted halls
groups were gathered arrayed as for some rite. He was in another world:
he had awakened from a slumber of centuries.*

*He stood still in the middle of the roadway, his heart clamouring
against his bosom in a tumult. A young woman dressed in a long pink gown
laid her hand on his arm to detain him and gazed into his face. She said
gaily:*

 *- Good night, Willie dear!*

*Her room was warm and lightsome. A huge doll sat with her legs apart in
the copious easychair beside the bed. He tried to bid his tongue speak
that he might seem at ease, watching her as she undid her gown, noting
the proud conscious movement of her perfumed head.*

*As he stood silent in the middle of the room she came over to him and
embraced him gaily and gravely. Her round arms held him firmly to her
and he, seeing her face lifted to him in serious calm and feeling the
warm calm rise and fall of her breast, all but burst into hysterical
weeping. Tears of joy and relief shone in his delighted eyes and his
lips parted though they would not speak.*

*She passed her tinkling hand through his hair, calling him a little
rascal.*

 *- Give me a kiss, she said.*

*His lips would not bend to kiss her. He wanted to be held firmly in her
arms, to be caressed slowly, slowly, slowly. In her arms he felt that he
had suddenly become strong and fearless and sure of himself. But his
lips would not bend to kiss her.*

*With a sudden movement she bowed his head and joined her lips to his and
he read the meaning of her movements in her frank uplifted eyes. It was
too much for him. He closed his eyes, surrendering himself to her, body
and mind, conscious of nothing in the world but the dark pressure of her
softly parting lips. They pressed upon his brain as upon his lips as
though they were the vehicle of a vague speech; and between them he felt
an unknown and timid pressure, darker than the swoon of sin, softer than
sound or odor.*

Taken from "A portrait of the artist as a young man" by James Joyce





