---
layout: post
title: "Kiss"
permalink: kiss
categories: [Reading]
---

 *- Tell us, Dedalus, do you kiss your mother before you go to bed?*

 *Stephen answered:*

 *- I do.*

*Wells turned to the other fellows and said:*

 *- O, I say, here's a fellow says he kisses his mother every night
 before he goes to bed.*

*The other fellows stopped their game and turned round, laughing. Stephen
blushed under their eyes and said:*

 *- I do not.*

*Wells said:*

 *- O, I say, here's a fellow says he doesn't kiss his mother before he
 goes to bed.*

*They all laughed again. Stephen tried to laugh with them. He felt his
whole body hot and confused in a moment. What was the right answer to
the question? He had given two and still Wells laughed. But Wells must
know the right answer for he was in third of grammar. He tried to think
of Wells's mother but he did not dare to raise his eyes to Wells's face.
He did not like Wells's face. It was Wells who had shouldered him into
the square ditch the day before because he would not swop his little
snuffbox for Wells's seasoned hacking chestnut, the conqueror of forty.
It was a mean thing to do; all the fellows said it was. And how cold and
slimy the water had been! And a fellow had once seen a big rat jump plop
into the scum.*

*The cold slime of the ditch covered his whole body; and, when the bell
rang for study and the lines filed out of the playrooms, he felt the
cold air of the corridor and staircase inside his clothes. He still
tried to think what was the right answer. Was it right to kiss his
mother or wrong to kiss his mother? What did that mean, to kiss? You put
your face up like that to say goodnight and then his mother put her face
down. That was to kiss. His mother put her lips on his cheek; her lips
were soft and they wetted his cheek; and they made a tiny little noise:
kiss. Why did people do that with their two faces?*

Taken from "A portrait of the artist as a young man" by James Joyce




